---
layout: post
# marp: true
title:  "replicate states in distributed system"
categories: jekyll update
published: true
---


### State replication is not that easy in distributed system
The scale and stability of service provided by single machine is limited by its resource and physical presence. To further scale service, a natural way is to add number of workers. Although from the hardware perspective, the CPU only have access to data physically located on its memory, it's nice to have a layer of programming abstraction that all workers share some states. 

In single leader replicated system, leader accepts write requests to state and broadcast the change to followers. Followers then apply change to their local state, to achieve shared memory. However, the whole system fail to work when the leader goes down. Despite expected time to fail of single machine takes years, there's always some error happening in compute cluster with thousands of compute node. How to replicate states in single-leader manner, when any leader could crash anytime?
### Consensus algorithms
When leader is out of reach, each node may have its own idea about leadership. If we want to maintain single leader, some negotiation must happen between them, to determine leadership of the whole system. 

We call such negotiation a consensus algorithm, if the negotiation follow properties below
1) accept proposal from each node of the system at most once per election
2) lead to a result that every node accepts, 
3) the result is proposed by some node in the system
4) every alive node eventually decides some value

Raft is a such consensus algorithm. It helps 
1) determine who's the next leader when current leader is down
2) replicate states to each node of the system

### Raft design goals
The arcane writing style of paxos, raft's predecessor, could be one reason consensus protocol remain black magic after 20 years after its publication. Taking the responsibility to popularize consensus algorithm, raft is designed with ==understandability== as purpose.

Raft approach this by introducing a **single** and **strong** leader. Single leader principle means there's at most one leader in the system and strong leader characterize the leader's behavior of treating its state as ground truth. It will change its local state confidently, and cover follower state with leader state when inconsistency occur.

Another design goal is ==safety==. Replicated states are expected to be exactly the same. However, with many factors influencing the message arrival time, it's unrealistic to expect each node to have the exactly same state. But clearly we want them to be consistent and the only difference is timing. When a state appear at a node, it's safe if this state have been or will be experienced in other nodes.

Deterministic finite automata (DFA) is introduced to formally express this property. For DFAs, if all node start with same state, they will arrive at the same state after taking the same transition steps. States become comparable when we understand state as initial state plus a log of transition happened, because the transition log is free from timing unreliability in distributed system. 

In formal language, the following properties are guaranteed
- **Election safety**: at most one leader can be elected in a given term
- **Leader Append-Only**: a leader never overwrites or deletes entries in its log; it only appends new entries
- **Log Matching**: if two logs contain an entry with the same index and term, then the logs are identical in all entries up through the given index
- **Leader Completeness**: if a log entry is committed in a given term, then that entry will be present in the logs of the leaders for all higher-numbered terms
- **State Machine Safety**: if a server has applied a log entry at a given index to its state machine, no other server will ever apply a different log entry for the same index

Don't put too much time understanding these guarantees in your first encounter with raft. I put these properties here as a reminder about a fact: however complicated the algorithm looks like, there are some purposes behind it.
### Concepts

### Leader Election
### Log replication

Mistake term number as current term
